I'm a painter I make large-scale
figurative paintings which means I paint
people like this but I'm here tonight to
tell you about something personal that
changed my work and my perspective it's
something we all go through and my hope
is that my experience may be helpful to
somebody to give you some background on
me I grew up the youngest of 8 yes 8
kids in my family I have six older
brothers and a sister to give you a
sense of what that's like when my family
went on vacation we had a bus my super
mom would drive us all over town to our
various after-school activities not in
the bus we had a regular car - she would
take me to art classes and not just one
or two she took me to every available
art class from when I was eight to
sixteen because that's all I wanted to
do she even took a class with me in New
York City
now being the youngest of eight I
learned a few survival skills rule
number one don't let your big brother
see you do anything stupid
so I learned to be quiet and neat and
careful to follow the rules and stay in
line but painting was where I made the
rules that was my private world by 14 I
knew I really wanted to be an artist my
big plan was to be a waitress to support
my painting so I continued honing my
skills I went to graduate school and I
got an MFA and at my first solo show my
brother asked me what do all these red
dots mean next to the paintings nobody
was more surprised than me
the red dots meant that the paintings
were sold and that I'd be able to pay my
rent with painting now my apartment had
four electrical outlets and I couldn't
use a microwave and a toaster at
same time but still I could pay my rent
so I was very happy here's a painting
from back around that time I needed it
to be as realistic as possible
it had to be specific and believable
this was the place where I was isolated
and in total control since then I've
made a career of painting people in
water bath tubs and showers or the
perfect enclosed environment it was
intimate and private and water was this
complicated challenge that kept me busy
for a decade I made about 200 of these
paintings some of them six to eight feet
like this one for this painting I mixed
flower in with the bath water to make it
cloudy and I floated cooking oil on the
surface and stuck a girl in it and when
I lit it up it was so beautiful I
couldn't wait to paint it I was driven
by this kind of impulsive curiosity
always looking for something new to add
vinyl steam glass I once put all this
Vaseline in my head in hair just to see
what that would look like don't do that
so it was going well I was finding my
way I was eager and motivated and
surrounded by artists always going to
openings and events I was having some
success and recognition and I moved into
an apartment with more than four outlets
my mom and I would stay up very late
talking about our latest ideas and
inspiring each other
she made beautiful pottery I have a
friend named Bo who made this painting
of his wife and I dancing by the ocean
and he called it the light years I asked
him what that meant and he said well
that's when you've stepped into
adulthood you're no longer a child but
you're not yet weighed down by the
responsibilities of life I was say it's
the light years on October 8th 2011 the
light years came to an end my mom was
diagnosed with lung cancer
it had spread to her bones and it was in
her brain when she told me this I fell
to my knees I totally lost it when I got
myself together and I looked at her I
realized this isn't about me this is
about figuring out how to help her my
father's a doctor and so we had a great
advantage having him in charge and he
did a beautiful job taking care of her
but I too wanted to do everything I
could to help so I wanted to try
everything we all did I researched
alternative medicines diets juicing
acupuncture finally I asked her is this
what you want me to do and she said no
she said pace yourself I'm gonna need
you later she knew what was happening
she knew with the doctors and the
experts and the internet didn't know how
she wanted to go through this I just
needed to ask her I realized that if I
tried to fix it I would miss it so I
just started to be with her whatever
that meant and whatever situation came
up just really listen to her if before I
was resisting then now was surrendering
giving up trying to control the
uncontrollable and just being there in
it with her time slowed down and the
date was irrelevant we developed a
routine early each morning I would crawl
into bed with her and sleep with her
my brother would come for breakfast and
we'd be so glad to hear his car coming
up the driveway so I'd help her up and
take both her hands and help her walk to
the kitchen she had this huge mug she
made she loved to drink her coffee out
of and she loved Irish soda bread for
breakfast afterwards was the shower and
she loved this part she loved the warm
water so I made this as indulgent as I
could like a spa my sister would help
sometimes we had warm towels
slippers ready immediately so she never
got cold for a second
I'd blow dry her hair my brothers would
come in the evenings and bring their
kids and that was the highlight of her
day over time we started to use a
wheelchair she didn't want to eat so
much and she used the tiniest little
teacup we could find to drink her coffee
I couldn't support her myself anymore so
we hired an aide to help me with the
showers these simple daily activities
became our sacred ritual and we repeated
them day after day as the cancer grew it
was humbling and painful and exactly
where I wanted to be we called this time
the beautiful awful she died on October
26 2012 it was a year and three weeks
after her diagnosis she was gone
my brother's sister and father and I all
came together in this supportive and
attentive way it was as though our whole
family dynamic and all our established
roles vanished and we were just all
together in this unknown feeling the
same thing and taking care of each other
I'm so grateful for them as someone who
spends most of my time alone in a studio
working I had no idea that this kind of
connection could be so important so
healing this was the most important
thing it was what I always wanted
so after the funeral it was time for me
to go back to my studio so I packed up
my car and I drove back to Brooklyn and
painting is what I've always done so
that's what I did and here's what
happened
it's like a release of everything that
was unraveling in me that safe very very
carefully rendered safe place that I
created in all my other paintings was a
myth it didn't work and I was afraid
because I didn't want to paint anymore
so I went into the woods I thought I'll
try that going outside I got my paints
and I wasn't a landscape painter but I
wasn't really much of any kind of
painter at all so I had no attachment no
expectation which allowed me to be
reckless and free I actually left one of
these wet paintings outside overnight
next to a light in the woods by the
morning it was lacquered with bugs but I
didn't care it didn't matter didn't
matter I took all these paintings back
to my studio and scraped them and carved
into them and poured paint thinner on
them put more paint on top drew on him I
had no plan but I was watching what was
happening this is the one with all the
bugs in it I wasn't trying to represent
a real space
it was the chaos and the imperfections
that were fascinating me and something
started to happen I got curious again
this is another one from the woods
there was a caveat now though I couldn't
be controlling the paint like I used to
it had to be about implying and
suggesting not explaining or describing
and that imperfect chaotic turbulent
surface is what told the story I started
to be as curious as I was when I was a
student so the next thing was I wanted
to put figures in these paintings people
and I loved this new environment so I
wanted to have both people and this
atmosphere when the idea hit me of how
to do this I got kind of nauseous and
dizzy which is
really just adrenaline probably but for
me it's a really good sign and so now I
want to show you what I've been working
on it's something I haven't shown yet
and it's like a preview I guess of my
upcoming show what I have so far
expansive space instead of the isolated
bathtub going outside instead of inside
loosening control savoring the
imperfections allowing the allowing the
imperfections and in that imperfection
you can find a vulnerability I could
feel my my deepest intention what
matters most to me that human connection
that can happen in a space where there's
no resisting or controlling I want to
make paintings about that so here's what
I learned we're all going to have big
losses in our lives maybe a job or a
career relationships love our youth
we're going to lose our health people we
love these kinds of losses are out of
our control they're unpredictable and
they bring us to our knees and so I say
let them fall to your knees be humbled
let go of trying to change it or even
wanting it to be different it just is
and then there's space and in that space
feel your vulnerability what matters
most to you your deepest intention and
be curious to connect to what and who is
really here awake and alive it's what we
all want let's take the opportunity to
find something beautiful in the unknown
in the unpredictable and even in the
awful thank you